Alright,
Thank you. Welcome back
committee members.
We've got our first submission
after this break is one on Zoom,
which is the Alexandra Bowling Club.
Who do we have? Um, I'm not sure.
Hi, Erin. Okay.
Just need to turn the camera off.
Do you know the, um,
so if anyone's here from the Alexandra Bowling Club,
if you could just turn your camera on.
Okay, fantastic. Thank you.
Thank you very much for, um, joining us today.
We've got your Russian submission here,
and we do have, uh, 10 minutes set aside
for your oral submission.
So over to you.
Okay, great. We the constable to share a PowerPoint?
Uh, yes. We'll just see if that's, yeah,
just getting that permission.
Yeah, you can share your screen now.
Yep, we can see that. Fantastic. Okay.
Thank you. Thank you. First of all, thanks very much
for the opportunity to present today.
Um, our major concern with the bill is, uh, our communities.
So we really feel that there's a need
to protect our communities
and with the current, um, bill, it doesn't do that
as sufficiently as we would like.
So just like to run
through this present presentation to talk to that.
Thank you. Um, under the current model, um,
we rely on funding from the poking machines.
So, um, at the moment, poking machines return about 40
to 90% of the revenue back to community groups,
which support essential services with within clubs.
However, the online gambling funding model doesn't have
the need to donate revenue back to communities like it does,
like the poke machines do.
And what that means is that as, um,
gambling moves away from poke machines into the online, uh,
gambling model, um, the amount of funding coming back
to our communities will dry up.
So, um, many, many clubs like our own, are, um,
totally reliant on the funding.
And without that funding, excuse me, I didn't mean
to click forward, um, without that funding, um,
possibility of our club continuing is pretty remote.
Um, the other thing it does is it undermines
their social contract.
So in today's world, the, there's a social contract ensuring
that gambling profits support the
communities that they're harmed for.
So our, our local community poker
machines are coming back to us.
So that is also, um, doesn't happen under this new model.
And, and why does our club matter?
I mean, what, what's one less bowling club in the world?
Well, we're, we're a bowling club.
We're also a, a Paton club.
We have Dance Pool, ilead, Mahjong, and cards.
So we, we have about 200 members.
It's run by three part-time staff members.
So we operate on a, on a oily rag.
And the rest of, rest of the, um,
the club is run by volunteers.
And our club offers a safe space for social interaction
and emotional support and a sense of belonging to members.
So that is really critical for so isolated individuals.
We have a lot of elderly people in our club and our services
and what they get from a club is super important.
Um, many of our members participate in physical a activities
and the social and,
and mental activities, which are just as important.
And many of our members are volunteers
and they, they, it, it promotes active community and,
and involvement and purpose.
The other thing that the club does is we're a vital link
between members and families.
So we have a lot of elderly people that don't have families
around them, and our club provides crucial support
connecting our members with their families at times.
And for those that don't have families,
the club becomes their family.
So that is why our club is important.
So not just as a Bowls club, it's a social
and emotional support network.
Now I wanna tell you about Bob.
So Bob, I've changed his name, but this is absolutely true.
So Bob, um, has been a vital member
of our club for 20 years.
Um, he's been responsible for organizing our,
our tournaments and he organizes sponsorship
and funding, um, for, for the tournaments.
Um, like many others in our club, the club has become an
integral part of his life.
It connects him to the community.
Now, Bob had a mental breakdown, um, a few months ago,
and that was because his concern
that the club was not gonna continue
and his fears, excuse me, his fears are warranted.
Um, the club, as I've mentioned
before, will close if we cannot keep continuing
to have funding from gambling proceeds.
It's that simple operating costs rise
and our maintenance costs are never ending.
And I, I genuinely feel fear for Bob.
Um, if we have to close, I'm now gonna pass you over
to my colleague and, and, uh,
you can see her on screen there, Helen.
Yeah, Helen lovely.
Helen is gonna tell Evelyn's story, um,
and I'll just pass my headphones.
We had to do it this way. Sorry.
No worries. Good afternoon.
So I just wanted to speak to you about Evelyn.
So Evelyn is actually my mother-in-law.
Um, we've changed her name to keep her private,
but Evelyn recently had started,
she's actually just recently moved to our area
and has always suffered from social anxiety.
And over the last few months has actually started coming
to our club on the Friday nights, um,
and enjoying the social outings.
And for her, this is her only social outing all week.
Um, she has started doing some casual bowls, um,
and joined in with others,
which is something that they all enjoy.
But the emotional impact for Evelyn prior to this was
that she was really struggling with self-confidence
and acceptance in a new community.
And so when she comes to the bowling club,
like any sports club, she feels very welcome
and that she can just be herself
If Evelyn has recently put her hand up, um, to help
with the club, um, she is developing a renewed sense
of worth, and her smile and laughter is infectious
and brings joy to so many others.
And if the club was to close, Evelyn would be lost again.
And she looks it's something that she looks forward
to every Friday night.
So this leads on to loneliness.
And, um, back in 2023,
after the pandemic,
the World Health Organization has actually declared
loneliness, um, to be a global health,
public health concern.
Um, it increases the risk of death by 26 to 29%
and increases the risk of heart attack,
strokes and dementia.
In our aging population since 2018,
42% of New Zealanders have identified as being lonely
or feeling lonely.
And it's one of the leading causes
of people going into residential care in New Zealand.
So by losing community groups
and sporting clubs, we are increasing, um, the risk
of loneliness for New Zealanders.
So Bob and Evelyn are dependent, are depending on you
to protect funding streams for a bowling club.
Please don't take away their reason
for getting outta bed in the morning.
Please ensure that community
and sports groups benefit from online gambling proceeds just
as much as they do from poking machine
funding as they do today.
Thank you.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Uh, I just had a question around about, uh, the costs
that you face.
So I've noted in your written submission you said inflation,
uh, and sponsorship
and also local government support is reducing.
And you also noted your, uh, support that you received, uh,
over the years through applying for grants and things.
Uh, could you just for the committee
provide any more detail about that grant element
of your funding and how, if, if,
or if that's got harder over the last few years?
Um, certainly. So, um, we have done a number
of submissions over the years, um, to, we've, um,
received the p machine funding from pub charities
and, um, a, uh, chair,
I can't remember a funding, um,
which is from the poke machines.
We have, um, covered a number
of different things, expenses such as wages, um,
and some situations being able to promote the club
to bring more people in.
Um, electricity
and utilities have been covered at times, um, as well as
some, uh, asset purchases.
So, um, we were fortunate
to get some sponsorship from a retirement home
nearby as they built.
And we got a van, um, to, uh, to borrow.
And we, um, have a, so it's a courtesy van
and it takes people to and from bowls, et cetera,
and the pub charities was able to fund a carport for that.
So we are able to keep it out, out of the weather.
Um, sponsorship is getting harder
and harder to get from, from businesses and such.
Um, businesses obviously are, are buckling down
and have their own concerns with rising expenses, et cetera.
It's not an easy time to get funding
from businesses as well.
Mm, thank you.
Uh, I'll just get you to end your screen share
and just see if there's any questions, colleagues,
but I think we have almost run out of, um, time now.
Anyway, uh, so thank you so much for joining us today
and thank you for the amazing work that you do.
Um, and Alexandra, it's been, uh, really lovely
to hear about that work, um,
and appreciate your engagement
with the committee today. Thank you.
Thank you for the opportunity. Thank you. Bye. Thank
You so much.
Thank you. Our next submission is in person.
Uh, so we have Andre here from the Special Olympics
Hu Valley Trust.
Uh, we've got your copy
of your written submission here, Andre.
Thank you so much for that. Uh,
but we'll leave over to you whether you want to talk to that
for a while or leave some time for questions at the end.
So floor is yours. Uh, well,
Good afternoon. Thanks
for the, um, chance to speak.
Um, as you said, I'm,
I'm representing Special Olympics Valley in, I suppose, um,
more of a, uh, clubs around the low and island.
I, I guess the crux of the oral mission here today is,
is talking about the consequence that the bill could have,
uh, for clubs like ourselves if the online gaming, uh,
providers are not required to give back to the community.
Um, the same way that, uh, the land base, uh, venues are
with, I've read the Martin Report, um,
and I think the evidence there is quite clear, um,
this report People Sports Collective as online,
um, gambling grows.
Um, um, it's sort of, it's, it's
because it's so easy to pick up your phone, you know,
I can pick a phone and start playing right now.
It's, it's, it's cons.
You know, you gotta have the land based venues are gonna be
able shrink when they shrink the pot of money
that's available, um, to, um,
register charities like ourselves.
Um, we'll, we're starting
to fight in a smaller and smaller pool.
Um, the briefing paper I think was
provided to Pam to, uh, cabinet, um,
does not require line operators
to give back to the communities.
They argue that communities been us
are becoming too dependent on those on class four
grants I've written down here.
It's misleading, but it's bloody insulting.
Um, we are not solely dependent on these grants.
We work incredibly hard
or our volunteers work incredibly hard to fundraise.
Grants don't replace our effort. They just ease the burden.
Um, they allow us to keep our programs running
instead of exhausting.
Um, our, um, army of volunteers that we need.
Also, the cabinet, um, the paper was, I think to, um,
presented cabinets contradicts the gambling at 2003.
Uh, crystal clear gambling revenue is meant to benefit,
um, community itself.
The top that the harmony creates, removing that principle,
uh, for online provi, um, providers undermines the entire
gambling regulation, in our opinion, think would be foolish
to ignore that if online, um,
providers don't contribute on the same terms.
Thousands of clubs across New Zealand do struggling.
I mean the previous, um, people just sort
of, um, added to that.
So I think parity is an absolute bottom line in
this, um, environment.
Um, give me,
I'll talk a little bit about our club at the moment.
So special in the Hub Valley, we receive no better funding
from central or local government.
Uh, not not 1 cent.
We have to beg and scrape for everything.
Um, every dollar we spend on our program
is raised by ourselves.
Um, as referenced in my written submission, our annual, um,
operating cost is between 60 and 70,000 each year.
And that's not to pay for wages, that's not to pay for, um,
um, rates or insurances.
We, we, we, we, we run through lean.
So everything we have goes towards the, um, hiring
of venues when we need them.
Um, and also, but in a national summers games year,
like we're in now, that, that comes up to 120,000
and plus, when we're sending athletes to in New Zealand,
again, we've, we, we have to raise those funds.
Um, the previous submitters talked about that social harm.
Mm. Um, our, I mean the program that we run,
the Special Olympics program nationally,
it saves government money.
We keep people of intellectual to save disabilities out
of the health system by getting the back
of getting them enjoying, um, life.
Um, we could be addressing mental, um, mental health.
Um, they talked about the pandemic of loneliness.
Well, we, we go some way to in social isolation for a lot
of our athletes, especially our older ones,
because quite often the only time they get outta the house
will do something for themselves is when they come to our,
um, uh, our trainings.
Um, they, they also talk about sponsorship.
We, we are not, um, if you excuse the term, the sexy option
for a lot of people, uh, wanting to sponsor us.
Unlike Paralympics who are awesome athletes
or elite athletes, we don't get our athletes on TV or,
and plus we don't trend very well on social media.
That means we, obviously, we don't provide the banking,
but for sponsors on top of that,
I treat carefully how I say this, A lot of our athletes
aren't exactly what sponsors are looking for.
They, they, they can't deliver speeches. A lot of them.
Some of them have behavioral issues
and behaviors, so they don't, they can't get up there
and present, um, for a sponsor.
So that sort of takes a big chunk
of available funding away from us.
Um, a lot of our athletes, um,
they're in supportive care environments.
Um, and after they've paid, um,
all their living expenses weekly, they're left for about 20
or $30 per week.
So it doesn't sp um, leave a lot of discretionary spending
for them to go into, um, paying for sports venues.
So while other sports
and code may, um, be able to corporate funding
or play a fees for Special Olympics, it's just,
it's just not a, um, a um, an option for us.
So that leaves us heavily relying on our volunteers.
Um, we have a wonderful group of volunteers who coach
and manage their sport athletes, um, day in, day out,
week in and week out.
But too often now we're asking those volunteers
to be out there doing sausages, organizing raffles instead
of been coaching our athletes on and on, on sports field.
So in fact, most
of them now are spending more time fundraising than they are
coaching and managing their athletes.
And that's not what a lot of them sign up for.
And we get volunteer fatigue
and a lot, we lose a lot of them.
Um, also unlike our, our, um,
our neurotypical athlete, we can't,
we can't use our athletes to do a lot of fundraising.
They can't go and do firewood drives.
They can't, they can't, um, get out there and sell r tickets
'cause it's, it's, it's a challenge for a lot of them,
especially those with, um, sensory needs.
So that's where we lead.
Um, we, um, end up sort of not having the funds available.
So when funding dries up, the harsh reality is we will have
to reduce programs and or in some cases close.
Um, well, I'm not saying this way
because I think there's more than 50 sporting organizations
who have made written submissions
to this have already said they're on the same predicament
without the community funding, that poses massive risk
to grassroots sports in this country.
Um, now, like I said, special Olympics Heart Valley,
we got very proud of our f**k papa that we are the original,
um, special Olympics Club in New Zealand.
This is where it all started in the early eighties.
Um, obviously my own son, he's a special,
he growing confidence into a proud
and, um, capable young man
'cause of his special Olympic journey.
But I wanna share one story.
It's quite po poignant, um, that we've got one athlete,
he came to us as 16-year-old.
He was living in supportive care arrangement.
He was still living alone in a house
with four full-time carers surrounding him.
'cause of his behavior. He, you know, weighed over 150, um,
kilos, no exercise.
His violent behavior was so serious that the police have,
have been caught on on numerous occasions.
He's heading to, to the justice
system and to the health system.
'cause his health was on the year to collapse.
So when he joined us two years ago, um, he's,
he's had this positive track in his life.
He's, he's dropped the weight.
Um, he is, he's playing two sports a week.
Um, his behavior's been transformed
'cause he does the exo he can't, uh, x up,
he can't participate with us.
And so Special Olympics
and it's no exaggeration has changed his life.
Um, so the truth is, if our funding disappears,
so does this chance to sell on the path, this positive path.
He doesn't just disappear with it.
He becomes society's problem.
The health, um, system cost will be costing it
and along with the justice system.
So that's why I, we think parity matters so much on this.
If land-based venues are required to get back to the venue,
uh, to the community,
online providers must do the same on equal terms.
Otherwise one industry grows
and the rest of us pay the price.
I don't what my time is. I
Think, I think we use that now. Alright.
So I'll, yeah, I'll lean there. Yeah.
But, um, any questions?
Um, I think, um, I'm just checking with Andy.
I think we're, we're probably good.
I think you've, um, yeah, no, no. I'll,
If I can ask a question, I'll Yep.
Andy, thank you so much for the work you're doing Andre.
Um, just you heard the, um, the submission prior
to you from Alexandra Bowling Club?
Yes, I did. You did.
So that, that point that they made about the importance
of the club as a place where people have a sense
of belonging, uh, sense of community, et cetera.
Can you just tell us a little bit about if
that same holds equally true?
Because I'm getting the feeling it probably does
with your organization.
You have no idea. When we, like in a few months time,
we're gonna be doing a torch run, um, prior
to the national summer game through.
Um, and we give our athletes their uniform.
If you wanna see people grow 10 feet in front of you,
that's the type, it's amazing.
'cause these people just, athletes just
don't have those opportunities.
And, um, when you can see them actually grow, I mean,
the young kid I refer to as a 16-year-old, he,
he can actually smile now
before he just grow at, people literally grow.
So I could,
It's life changing stuff.
Oh, beyond life changing. Yeah. Yeah. Beyond.
Yeah. Thank you so much. Thank
You so much. Thank you very much.
Yeah. Thank, thank you for the, I thank speak on behalf
of the committee to thank you
for the work that you do as well.
'cause um, I think today we've heard from a number
of different organizations and it's really, uh, amazing
to hear of the incredible work
that's going on in the community.
So point well made about the community funding,
but also thank you for the work
that you are doing Alright in the community.
Thank you so much for coming in as well.
Really appreciate that. Thank you. Bye-bye. See you. Bye.
So our next submitter is a Zoom submission
and that is the Port Nicholson Cycling Club.
Are there, we've got Nick, is that it?
Hi. Hi. Welcome to the committee.
Thank you for joining us.
We've got your written submission here
and we've got, uh, 10 minutes to hear from you today.
So apologies we're running a few minutes late.
Uh, but, um, we'll give you 10 minutes for your submission,
uh, to use how you wish over to you.
Yeah, cool. Um, I've just dialed in
and heard a couple of submitters, so I think, you know,
what you'll hear is probably along similar lines.
Um, we're a small club active in
Wellington for about a hundred years.
Uh, organizing cycling events, encouraging people young
and old into the sport.
We have about a hundred members currently organized over 20
different events each year, as well
as offer training and coaching help.
Um, we aim to make the sport as accessible as possible,
providing kit, uh, and equipment if necessary,
and keeping the club fees low.
Uh, funds help us achieve more than what we can offer just,
just from club fees and other methods of fundraising.
Um, so I understand you would've heard evidence, um,
about the sort of the knock on effect of, uh,
the drop in money going to sort of grant
and pokey fund organizations.
And we're already sort of noticing that it's a bit harder
to come by grants and sponsorship over the last few years.
Um, but I'll sort of keep the my
and talk just on the effects, um, on our club if
that continues and gets worse as this evidence suggests.
So grant income is constituting around 10 to 45%
of our annual income, depending on how successful we've been
with applications during the year.
Uh, recent grants in the last couple of years have helped us
to, uh, buy a defibrillator for our club rooms, um,
send club rooms on first aid courses,
help fund riders traveling to expensive, um, uh,
major events around the country, um, by sort
of things like a timing system as well as medals
and trophies for some of the events we organized.
And, um, as I mentioned, buying kits
and equipment that we can loan out to people
who don't have their own.
Uh, I mean, the, the impact to us of not having these grants
to cover these expenses is that we can't do these things
or we have to pass on costs to members, um,
or put, uh, volunteer resource into fundraising, uh,
versus coaching and organizing, all that kind of stuff.
Uh, the sort of the flow on effects, um,
further down the line are that there's just extra barriers,
uh, that, that, sorry, those previous things would cause
extra barriers, um, for people not
to join the club or be in the sport.
Um, we'd have fewer active members
and basically the sport would become harder to access.
Um, it's not only these small things though.
Um, in 2020 we finished a multi-year project
to resurface the Wellington Velodrome.
We raised about 190,000, uh, dollars
out of the total 200 acquired just from grants, um,
to resurface the Velodrome.
Um, the early advice I got was
that we wouldn't get this done with sausage sizzles
and give a little and raffles and stuff like that.
And they were right. Um, it would've been, uh, we,
we'd still be doing it basically.
Um, those grants helped us secure that asset for Wellington,
um, and provide a venue for, say, cycling
and become a, um, it's become the focal point for our club.
It's been, uh, sort of a fantastic boon.
So yeah, long story story short.
So we really couldn't do
what we're doing without net grant funding.
Uh, I'd be concerned for the club and the sport itself.
Um, but as you've heard with sort of one club among hundreds
and, um, would dread to think
what the cumulative social effects would
be from all these clubs.
Um, struggling through lack of funding.
That's all I have to say.
Thank you. Thanks very much for your submission.
I'll just check with my colleagues if they have
any questions for you.
Um, Andy, you looked like you were opening your mouth
to ask a question there. No,
No, very, very clear. All
I was gonna say, it was good to see the work
that you did on the ome, Nick.
Yeah, you were on the council.
Thanks for your support. Well, I
Was mayor at the time, so Oh, were you?
Yes, you were. Sorry. Yeah, we went through a couple
of mayors the whole process, but yeah. Yes,
I know. These take time, so
well done. Yeah,
Yeah, yeah. Thanks
very much that Nick. I've, I've read
through your written submission
and, um, point well made, um,
and I think echoing some
of the other points we've heard today around, um, funding
and, and the need for that, um, community, uh, component,
um, and benefit to the community,
which I think is quite a strong, um, message
that we've been having today.
So thank you very much for, um, joining us
and for the work that you do within the community as well.
Cool. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Thanks. Take care.
All right, so now we've got, uh,
the Wanderers Community Sports Club
joining us by Zoom.
It's just coming in now. Okay.
Oh, hello,
Uh, Jimmy or James there?
Um, I think we can hear you, but we can't see you.
All right, there we go. Is that,
Uh, perfect.
That's great. Thank you.
Thank you for joining us today
and thanks for your written submission.
We've, um, had an opportunity to have a look through that
and we've got, uh, 10 minutes to discuss it with you today.
So over to you.
Uh, thanks very much and, um,
and thanks for the opportunity to, uh, present on behalf
of the Wonderous Sports Club Club.
Um, so I've listened to a couple of, uh,
of submissions previously,
and I think ours is gonna be along well.
It is along very similar lines.
Um, so yeah, my name's Jimmy.
I'm the, uh, I'm currently the manager
of the, of the sports club.
Um, but I'm also a parent of a child here
and I grew up playing for myself,
so it's a pretty special place, uh, for me.
Um, I'm here obviously, um, to talk about this bill.
Um, we understand the objective of it, um,
but we believe that it has a critical omission, um,
and it's gonna have devastating
or likely have devastating impacts across the
community sporting sector.
Um, and that includes our organization.
Um, so a little bit about Wanderers. We have 750 members.
Uh, we started off as a rugby club 74 years ago,
75th next year.
Um, we also now have cricket.
We have a community gym, um, and we have squash courts.
In the past, we've had a netball, we've had football, um,
rugby league, indoor bowls, and a raft of other balls.
And we've serviced the, uh, the Brightwater community
and surround the communities
with basically whatever's needed at the time,
and we continue to do so.
Um, our funding from grant funding is
around $110,000 a year on average.
Um, that's obviously a considerable amount, uh,
or percentage, usually around 33% of our overall revenue.
Um, and that, that allows us
to cover expenses like insurance.
Um, last year our insurance bill was, uh, $14,000.
This year it's around the same, um, it allows us
to fund sporting equipment, so the shirts for kids, uh,
the balls, the ripper rugby tags, um,
everything really that we need for, um, sports.
Um, it allows us to employ staff,
which I can assure you is definitely needed now.
Um, with, with the increased regulation, um, health
and safety, um,
and all those sorts of, uh, things
that go on in the background that volunteers, uh,
don't really think about.
Um, we, we, and,
and as well, we want our volunteers
to be focusing on, on, on the, on field.
So this funding allows us to provide a safe environment
for all of our, um, players.
Um, it covers facility maintenance and improvements.
So our facilities are, um, are of a pretty good standard.
Um, and it's, you know, things like being able
to put in LED lights.
Um, field lights allow our members
to use the fields year round at whatever time.
Um, it's covered improvements to our gym, um,
and our gym's had a massive impact on the community.
So, so just one, um,
one community outreach example is we've recently, well,
five years ago started a, a, a senior mobility program,
which is aimed at, um, getting more older people,
so 55 plus into the gym to reduce the chance
of them falling over pretty much in the, in the future.
Um, and that started off with five members,
and over the last five years, it has grown to 100, um,
which takes, which takes a lot of, um,
I guess effort to, to keep on top of, of all of the,
the varying, um, health conditions that these people have.
So grant funding has allowed us to cover an instructor to,
to pay attention to all these health conditions,
build rapport with, with these older people.
Um, and now, you know,
100 people from our very small region are benefiting
from, from the service.
Um, without the funding, our membership just couldn't afford
to pay the fees, um, associated with,
with running a sports club.
So, you know, $250,000 is our, um,
our, our annual expenses.
So the, the revenue we get from membership fees is only
around $30,000.
So that is a significant gap, uh, which, you know,
which needs to be filled with something.
Um, and, and we are fortunate currently that,
that we do quite well with our grant funding, um,
and we can provide these opportunities.
So for me, the, the fundamental flaw, um, is of,
of this current bill is that it would abandon the,
the principle that a portion
of gambling proceeds must be returned to the community.
Um, and by licensing up to the 15 online operators,
without their obligation,
the bill would create a very unlevel playing field.
So while I know we would be eligible
for grant funding going forward, um, it's,
it's quite predictable, uh, that a large chunk of
that group would, um, would move to online gambling
and that the, the pool of funding from the, uh,
the traditional poking machines would go down while the
online, um, you know, sort of well the, the people going
to the online would increase, um, and, and,
and then decreasing, uh, funding
for nonprofit organizations around the country.
Um, so if it has passed as it is, uh,
without an alternative, there will be a financial crisis.
As I know you've heard, um,
from many nonprofit organizations around the country.
Um, it'll be no different to Wanderers without the $110,000
or of a significantly reduced funding pool.
Um, you know, we just wouldn't be able
to carry on the same way we're going.
And that would lead to pretty much a reverse in
all of those positive things.
I mentioned before, it would be the
degradation of facilities.
Um, we wouldn't be able to fix the leaky roofs without, um,
you know, a, a a, uh, funding effort sort of
outside of our capabilities.
We wouldn't be able to, um, upgrade to LED lights, um,
which have been a, a, a hugely positive investment.
We wouldn't be able to fund these community outreach
programs because they would be running
at a loss to the club.
Um, so those seniors, they are benefiting currently from,
from us, you know, being stronger
and, and more well balanced.
Um, they just, you know,
we just wouldn't be able to cater to them.
Um, community events like Maki
and all this other stuff that we're doing on the periphery,
we just wouldn't be able to do.
Um, we couldn't employ staff. It would be all volunteer run.
The operations would be considerably scaled back.
Um, and yeah, I guess the, the point here I'm trying
to make is that the, the loss to the community would be,
um, would, would be great.
So our request is that, um, the bill is amended
to uphold the principle that ga,
that gambling benefits the community.
Um, we urge, um, we urge you to,
to establish something requiring these new online casino
operators to return a fair share of the,
of the New Zealand revenue
to the communities from which they profit.
Um, the model already exists in, in the old bill
or the, the old system.
And it would be good to see it
apply to this new environment.
Um, you know,
regulating this industry shouldn't be at the expense of the,
of, of the nonprofit community organizations.
Um, thank you for your time.
Hopefully that was within, within my timeframe. Yes.
Yeah, that was, thank you.
I I just had a quick question if, if it's okay,
the question I had was, sure.
In your written submission, you talk about, uh,
community sport being the, the thing that should be funded
through these community grants.
Um, did you, do you mean that you think that
that should exclusively be what it funds
or that it should be a big proportion
or a significant component of, of the, um, of the funding
that that may, may
or may not be available through this, um, new system
of regulating online gambling?
No, I think, um, nonprofit organizations should benefit
not just exclusively, um, sports organizations.
Sure. Okay. That, that is great.
Thank you so much, um, for joining us today
and for, um, sharing, uh, what you do, uh, in your,
uh, community sports club.
It was really interesting to hear that.
And thank you for the
contribution you make to your community.
No worries. Thank you for your time.
Thank you so much. Take care.
Thanks everyone. Uh, so members, we have, uh,
now the wider Upper Multisport Club Incorporated.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Um, I'm currently a board member of Athletics New Zealand
Deputy Chair of Central Districts Cricket Association,
and a member of the Wellington Weap
Lotteries Community Committee.
And until recently, I was also deputy chair
of the Wellington Rugby Union.
I've seen firsthand both the challenges faced
by sporting organizations to find money to deliver sport
and the benefits to community organizations from the
distribution of funds from gambling.
The pressure on these distributions is real as there is more
and more demand from more organizations every funding round.
Today I'm speaking to you in my capacity as the Secretary
of WA Upper Multi-Sport Club, the home
of the longest running kids triathlon in New Zealand.
Now in its 36th year.
This multi-sport event hosts over 500 kids over three
successive Mondays during the summer.
The whited Upper Multisport Club Committee would like the
Governance and Administration Committee to understand
that our club prefers that money
to support sport wasn't generated from gambling
or people's addiction to gambling.
However, we know
and appreciate that there is very little alternative in the
current sports funding model.
Some may say it's a necessary evil
until we can find a better way to fund our sport.
Small sports organizations like ours try
to survive on members' fees, sponsorship revenue,
which is mainly in kind revenue as sponsorship commitments
by local businesses are starting to dry up.
Cash sponsors are becoming rarer and rarer.
You've probably heard that quite a lot today.
Our club generates an average
of 10,000 every year from grants and sponsorship.
Combined when we apply for grants is
to assist us in funding equipment such as course flags,
road signs, racing bibs, timing equipment,
flotation devices, and a trailer
and shipping container to move
and store equipment as well as, as dock concessions
and traffic management expenses.
It is becoming much harder to fund event activity,
and we have had to reduce our offerings to our, uh,
to our members and to the wider multi-sport community.
And we must ensure we stay in our budget.
We are all volunteers, but tangible things
still need to be paid for.
With our kids' triathlon, we try to stay affordable
as we don't want both Tamari and Ranga, Tahi
and Adapa to miss out on the opportunities to participate.
So we have increased our, we haven't increased our fees
because our local parents are struggling, truly struggling
to pay for things like this.
So to give you an idea of fees,
the club has free club membership to all kids under 18
to take part in our weekly club events.
And we charge $10 50 for each child to enter.
All three kids try events.
So you've got more than one child.
We, we have kids that enter from literally three,
four years old all the way up to 16, 17.
That would be quite a lot for a family.
We charge a variety of fees
for adults depending on whether the member wants to be a try
and z competitor, but we try to keep it less than $80.
The shifts from physical
to the online world are changing our club
and the community dynamics.
Running costs continue to increase on our members
and try our kids, try parents
of finding fees harder to justify.
More people are being attracted to screen sports
and irregular pay-as-you-go.
Recreation volunteer members are rapidly declining and,
and it's particularly in this new dynamic landscape
and the, it's much, much harder to find
and retain volunteers.
So through my experience with other sporting organizations,
I acknowledge that whited up a multi-sport
club is not unique.
And you've heard of sounds like from countless, um,
organizations today
that we're all experiencing the same things.
Sadly, though, without access to grant funding,
revenue sport across the board from national sporting
organizations to our small club is at risk
as community grant funding also pays for much
of the operational activity that takes place,
that makes community sport happen.
Salaries of the staff that administer
and deliver sport from CEOs, general managers through
to the community and event staff, to regional dev uh,
development offices, rental IT equipment
amongst other things are paid for by, by grant funding.
Dwindling grant revenue is putting pressure on
delivering sport in New Zealand.
And so we believe that community sports should be a core
beneficiary of online, uh, casino gambling revenues.
The reduction of gaming grants will add further pressure,
severely impacting what we can do for our participants.
The shift to online gambling should not add to
that pressure, certainly
by not dodging the obligation to share the revenue.
Sport improves mental
and physical wealthbeing for both young
and old as well as youth engagement
and community connection.
And I know you've heard that even just this afternoon,
my children and I have personally benefited from
participating in rugby, hockey, swimming,
athletics, and triathlon.
We've made friends learn reliance, leadership, empathy
and compassion, and developed a solid foundation
to go out in the world
for a country the size of a small city.
We punch well above our weight on the world podium
and it all starts at our local clubs.
Why did upper multi-sport club would like the bill to ensure
that some of the revenue from the online gambling is shared
with the community, but especially with sport.
That's my submission. Thank you.
Thank you so much, uh, for that Catherine,
and also for the incredible work
that your organization does.
Um, you've kind of indicated in your submission that you,
that you said things were getting more difficult recently.
Has that been through all forms of funding that you receive?
Absolutely. I mean, even, you know, if you,
from grant funding just to going to your local, you know,
the, the person, the company
and the person that sponsors on a regular basis,
they're finding it difficult now to to,
to certainly provide cash, which helps
to buy tangible things,
but even to, you know,
to give items from their shops or whatever it is.
So it is becoming a lot more difficult. Yes.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Uh, I think, I think we've probably used all our time now
and I can't see any questions from the committee members,
so I just want to thank you again for the work
that you're doing and for taking the time today
to come and submit to us.
Yeah, thank you a lot for listening
us too, and it's a long day. Thanks.
It's no problem at all. Take care. Thank you. Bye.
Thank you. Um, members, we've now got, um,
two in-person submissions.
Our first is by with the Salvation Army.
Um, so Paul, now is anyone joining us online?
Okay, so I think we've got, we do have Lisa here as well.
Uh, thank you. So we'll just see if we
can get Lisa on as well.
And then, um, just for the next then we'll move on to
just straight away afterwards, if that's okay.
We're just running a bit ahead of time, so
rather than have you sitting here.
Yeah. Awesome. Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Welcome, uh, Lisa, we've got Paul here, um,
who you'll shortly be able to see, uh, we've got 10 minutes
to hear your submission
and we do have a copy of your written submission, so,
uh, over to you both. Thank you. Thank
You. Yeah.
Um,
I'm Paul Barber from the Salvation Army Social Policy
and Parliamentary Unit, um, with Lisa Campbell, who's, uh,
a management consultant for us, uh, working in this area.
Um, you have, as you have our written submission in front
of you, and thank you for the chance to offer some comments.
Um, the Salvation Army to obey wha water recognizes the need
for effective regulation, um, of online casino gambling.
But we're deeply concerned
that this bill doesn't prioritize harm
prevention and minimization.
And we believe the approach to, uh,
regulation proposed is inadequate.
Um, we want to see people put at the center
of this legislation and not simply facilitating the,
the operation of the online gambling market.
Um, it's, this is a real plea really
to put people at the center.
Um, and we recommend some key changes to the bill
to add key protections
and incorporate harm prevention principles
of the gambling Act 2003 into this bill ex expressly.
Um, we recognize the gambling harms disproportionate impact
on Maori, um,
and we believe that Maori representation in the governance
and management of the regulatory system needs
to be legislated through this bill.
Uh, and we want to see the same approach taken
to consulting on and designing regulations, um, uh,
as is taken for other gambling under the gambling act.
Um, and, uh, as well as seeing a centralized
and independently operated self-exclusion, uh, register
that links to the existing land-based system
that's up and operating.
And Lisa will say more about that shortly.
Uh, we also oppose the use of credit for online gambling,
uh, that needs to be prohibited.
The minimum wage need, uh, minimum age
for gambling should be 20 years another in line
with other gambling law.
Um, and there should be a robust independence dispute system
and good data protection safeguards.
And above all, we're opposed to, uh, any advertising of, uh,
online casino gambling.
I believe there should not be permitted.
Uh, so I'm just gonna say briefly some more about the
advertising and Lisa, we'll talk about the, uh,
the exclusions register.
Um, the, there's some recent research, um, has re
that's been published, has reiterated that, uh, children
are exposed to wide range of unhealthy, uh, commodities, uh,
UHCs as they are abbreviated unhealthy food,
alcohol, tobacco, and gambling.
Um, and they're commodities that contribute substantially
to global public health harm.
Um, and re research shows that
when you compare across different UHCs,
the most effective controls on marketing content come
through statutory restrictions.
Self-regulation, uh, by the industries in contrast, fails
to protect children from widespread marketing.
And exploitative marketing is recognized
as a major public health threat for a global threat
for children's health.
Um, there are no statutory restrictions on marketing content
for TAB and lasso New Zealand.
The two currently legal forms of online gambling, um,
permitted to market their online gambling products.
Whereas there are very high restrictions on
advertising tobacco i a ban.
And this is reflected in the minimal exposure
that's seen in research for children, uh, to that marketing.
And so when we believe the same restrictive approach is
needed in this, uh, on, in the approach to online gambling,
um, there's research underway already looking at further,
further at what children see online.
And while we, we don't have the results available, um,
we really urge the select committee in its consideration
to follow the available evidence
and embed the strongest possible, um,
protections in this legislation and regulation.
And if there is to be an advertising, it has
to be in a plain packaging type approach, um, that, um,
uh, does not, uh, uh, minimizes their level of mitigation
that's involved, we believe it's fair
to require very strong restrictions
and standards as the price of being given the social license
of operating a legal online casino
and operation in this country.
There's a chance in this legislation
that we could be world leaders in harm prevention
and we really urge the select committee in parliament
to take this seriously
and, uh, do their utmost to, uh,
strengthen the harm prevention.
And just hand over to Lisa to talk about the successful
work on the, um, exclusions.
Thank you, Paul.
Um, I've been involved in the development
and the evolution of the multi venue exclusion, um,
system since 2008 as the national operations manager
for the Salvation Army, uh, Oasis, um, preventing
and minimizing gambling harm, uh, services
and want to talk to a little bit of this experience.
Um, first I just wanted to reiterate what Paul said
that we believe gamblers should be at the center
of any gambling harm minimization approach
and access to tools and support should be simple
and easy, um, for them to access to be truly effective.
Um, Maori venue exclusion was developed to enable gamblers
to exclude from multiple venues without having
to present in person to each individual site.
This was to ensure problem gamblers were able
to quickly access this intervention tool without having
to go through the pro the process of excluding
multiple times with different gambling operators.
Um, if each online operator has their own voluntary
exclusion register,
then we will in effect be going backwards
and making it harder for people suffering from gambling harm
to get the support they need
because they all have to do multiple exclusion requests.
This is primarily why we believe there should, should, um,
be only one national exclusion register.
Uh, the first, uh, there's been two reviews
of the Mave exclusion system.
One in 2015 with a, a survey across all stakeholders
to understand how the national, um,
Mave exclusion system was working in any
improvements that could be made.
Findings from this showed that all stakeholders responded
that MVE provides an effective intervention
for those experiencing gambling harm.
That's the multiple venue exclusion.
Client responses also showed that the process must be easy
and straightforward to be affected.
Other key findings in
that 2015 review included the development of an independent,
independent to industry national administration service
to oversee the process nationally
and provide quality control and improvement functions, uh,
and ensure a standardization
and consistency of the exclusion process.
A national centralized secured database was also recommended
to streamline the MVE, the exclusion process
for all stakeholders and ensure privacy is protected, uh,
and national reporting of key statistics
and data around exclusion, exclusion.
So we believe our, our experience since 2008.
The best approach is an independent national centralized
secure database register coordinated centrally to provide,
uh, independence
and the most effective way that people can access, uh,
the exclusions.
We are also aware that some gamblers will gamble across
multiple modes and move from land-based
to online gambling and vice versa.
Therefore, to have an accurate understanding
of gambling harm at both an individual
and a population level, we need data for both online
and land-based gambling harm.
Um, so therefore we also recommend an integrated exclusion
platform covering both, um, online
and land-based exclusions.
It's the best way that we can get, uh,
the information we need to ensure
that we have effective harm.
Minimization measures, uh,
key findings from the 2025 MV review that, um,
conducted and that just this year, uh,
the report has just gone out on, um, health New Zealand's,
uh, um, site actually on the National Maori venue exclusion,
um, website, uh,
sector respondents view the Maori venue exclusion process
as a valuable and effective tool for reducing gambling harm.
That's all, um, respondents.
So both the industry sector as well as, um, preventing
and minimizing gambling harm services
and clients themselves.
Key impacts, uh, found, um, from uh,
Maori venue exclusion was empowerment
and control that MVA gives individuals the ability
to take control of their own gambling behavior.
Uh, it's a barrier to access it.
Pres prevents access to gambling opportunities,
which helps reduce temptation to gamble
and further harm from occurring.
Um, support for recovery.
Many noted that the exclusion helps people begin
and maintain recovery often in conjunction with counseling,
um, and community and whanau, um, benefits.
There is a positive ripple effect on families
and communities we frequently mentioned.
Um, and the one area there, uh,
that I think is relevant here is that they were asking
for more pro promotion of the available availability
of the actual exclusion, um, process, which I think is
relevant in something that should be thought of, um,
going forward, is how
to promote these harm minimization tools,
especially the exclusion part.
Um, uh, the MVE current MVE statistics, uh, show
that these 920 current individuals have, um,
a mave exclusion, uh, in place.
And that totals 61,757 total ex
exclusions across all of the class four venues.
Um, so if we, if we use kind of current estimates
of just the problem gamblers, um, about 6,000,
it's about one in every six problem gamblers are
completing an exclusion.
So it's about 17%
of problem gamblers completing an exclusion.
However, only about 250,
there is only about 250 venue exclusions,
so less than a third of exclusions are completed
via the gambling industry.
Um, so we find it's more effective when it's facilitated
independently and via, um, um, the preventing
and minimizing gambling harm services
and the importance of having that connection
with the preventing and minimizing gambling harm services.
Um, so they're able to support their clients
to self exclude, um,
and an easy kind of integrated platform.
It's a more effective pathway.
Thank you so much, Lisa. Thank you.
We have, um, pretty much used up all of our time.
I'm not sure if Endy is there at the moment
to ask his question.
He might have, um, just dropped off there for a second.
So, um, but there he is. There you go. All good. All good.
So quick question, Andy. Yeah,
Very, very quickly. Uh,
just right at the beginning, um, you talked about, uh,
the kind of, um, arrangements you would like to see happen.
Um, but just the, the difference between having a, um,
a regulated and an on a non-regulated
situation at the moment, we've got something like
800 million we understand
and growing at about 18% a year of
unregulated online gambling.
Um, do you see with the, the restrictions
that you're suggesting there being any difference
between regulated and on
and unregulated, particularly the advertising bit?
I would, I mean, the, the point we're making is that you,
you are legalizing, um, certain platforms
that are the regulated ones.
Everything else is made illegal
and I think there's a very powerful incentive on a, um,
a gambling provider to, to run a legal operation
To, to run a legal Yes, legal, yeah,
A legal question. Yes. Okay.
Yeah. Thank you Melissa.
Uh, I'm very interested in the, uh, MVE
and who actually runs that register currently
and how do the operators actually know to ban these people,
exclude these people?
Yeah, a absolutely, um, Melissa,
so it is the Salvation Army
that does have the current contract, um, for the, um,
national Maori Venue Exclusion administration services.
And we've been running that since 2018.
Um, and sorry you to remind me of the other questions.
How do they access, how dunno
Yeah. And is
the data available to the actual operators
to exclude the, um, problem gamblers?
No. They, the, they, um,
people can exclude themselves via gambling services
and, um, Maori venue exclusion coordinators,
um, across the country.
This is funded through, uh, health New Zealand.
Um, and so the reason that we've done it that way is
because, um, the,
the services provide better informed consent.
They, um, go through the whole process
and that with the problem gambler,
they're talking about their privacy, what it's all about.
Plus there's lots of conditions.
So for example, if you exclude from this venue,
then there's five other venues that are owned
by the same place that they will exclude, exclude you.
Um, so the amount of information and that that is, um, uh,
provided to the gamblers
and that through, um, a counseling service is much, um,
is a much higher amount of information than what would come
Through the, so, so what I'm trying to understand is
that they registered to be excluded from a,
uh, gambling venue.
Yes. So what I'm actually saying is
that apart from them having access
and self-identifying that they have a problem,
which is a great start, how do the venues know
to exclude these people? Or don't they?
Yeah, because, um, a request is sent through to them,
so it's all on a centralized database system.
So once, uh, an exclusion request is entered into the
database by our national administrator, um, uh, an email,
and that is sent out to all of the venues, uh,
that the person is requesting exclusion from.
So they get an, an instant notification that there is a, uh,
exclusion for their venue,
and then they just have to log onto the, to the database
and, um, check that they have, um, uh, received that
and the exclusion has been in
Place. Right. Great, great
centralized system from your end.
So how responsive are those operators, including these,
how op how, how are they,
how responsive are these operator
operators when they receive your request
that these people have requested
for exclusion from their gambling venue or site?
Yeah. Um, the, the rule is, is that they must, um, access
and approve it within 48 hours.
Um, and there's a pretty good, uh, response rate.
Some people do it immediately, um, probably up
to over a half, and they do it within the 48 hours.
Um, the, the benefit
of a national system is then we can provide reporting
and information back to the societies
and to the Department of Internal Affairs on those, um,
people that are not, um,
are not approving the exclusion within 48 hours.
So therefore it, it creates, you know, a learning kind of,
um, environment and they can check, check on the compliance
and work through that, but most
people are pretty good. Yeah.
Thank you so much. That's, that's really interesting.
Um, and something that we might, um, need
to follow up a little bit with
our advisors afterwards as well.
So thanks for drilling
And happy, happy to provide the information.
Um, yeah, and thanks for that as well. Thank you so much.
Appreciate that. Thank you. Thank you.
We now have another in person submission
from Tain New Zealand.
Actually, I don't know if you wanna tain New Zealand tain.
We're both, um, uh, welcome to the Governance
and Administration Committee.
We do have 10 minutes for your submission.
You would've, um, seen how it works, so over to you.
Thank you. Thanks, Madam Chair, members of the committee,
thank you for the opportunity to appear today.
Tain welcomes the creation of a legal,
well regulated online casino market in New Zealand.
Done well. This reform can shift black market activity
into a safer, more transparent framework, one
that protects consumers
and delivers lasting benefits for communities.
Tain already employs more than 400 people across six offices
in New Zealand and
through the TAB New Zealand contributes over 200 million
annually to local racing, sport
and community organizations Globally,
we operate 35 online casino brands across more than 30
regulated markets in Europe and North America.
That experience tells us regulation can succeed,
but only when it is carefully staged
and backed by strong enforcement.
We are concerned that allocating all 15 licenses immediately
risks regulatory failure.
Jurisdictions that have moved too quickly such
as Netherlands, Brazil,
and Ontario, struggled with enforcement.
Too many operators at once means incon,
inconsistent harm minimization, weaker consumer protections,
and a greater risk of social harm.
There is also a real risk of advertising oversaturation.
New Zealand's media market has limited capacity to
advertising from 15 operators.
We have seen firsthand in both Australia
and New Zealand how oversaturation drives public backlash,
not just against online casinos,
but across the entire gambling sector, including wagering,
land-based casinos and the racing industry.
We want this reform to succeed.
That's why we recommend Number one, a phased rollout,
starting with fewer than 15 licenses.
Prioritizing trusted New Zealand based
and New Zealand regulated organizations.
Two, allowing TAB New Zealand to participate either directly
or in partnership with trusted operators
to protect the well established model for funding racing,
sport and communities.
And three, strengthening enforcement powers,
including civil penalties, site blocking the banking tools
modeled on Australia's ecma.
Can I reiterate that? N 10 brings deep global capability
in online casinos.
Importantly, we made the deliberate choice
to withdraw from New Zealand in 2023
when it was a gray market
because our principle is clear, we only operate
where gambling is legal
and properly regulated from that perspective.
I want to share fi one final observation.
If the regulated market here is not commercially viable
for responsible operators,
the black market will continue to thrive.
Customers will inevitably, inevitably be drawn off back
to offshore black market operators
offering fewer protections,
and that creates many unintended consequences,
more social harm, less community funding and ero,
and an erosion of trust in the system.
That's why success requires two things.
First, a viable regulatory framework
that allows trusted operators to compete fairly, educate
and migrate customers to the regulated sector.
And secondly, strong enforcement powers
to shut down black market operators who work around
and outside the system.
Madam Chair Entertain is committed to working
with the committee and the Department of Internal Affairs
to ensure the new regime delivers on its promise
a safer market, stronger protections,
and the sustainable funding to New Zealand communities.
Welcome with questions.
Thank you. Um, I've got a question.
I've actually got three questions.
So the first one is, I was really interested
to hear you raise advertising
'cause when, when I was first considering this, um, bill,
uh, that was one thing that really stuck out for me.
Uh, is there a comparison through the markets that you work
with or in Australia or with, with other jurisdictions?
Um, about if, if the bill goes ahead as it's drafted,
what New Zealanders are likely to see in relation
to online gambling advertising?
Uh, yes. So, you know, especially in a 15 operator regime,
we can expect to see a increase in advertising.
So, you know, our recommendation is
that there is a strong framework around advertising.
You know, it could well be, um, time of day restrictions.
Uh, definitely should be age gate
restrictions in social media.
In the social media and digital environment
because yeah, there will be, you know,
an increase in advertising for sure.
Yeah. Okay. That, that's really helpful.
And I think, um, might be if we, maybe if we correspond
with you to get some Absolutely.
Information would be really helpful. Absolutely.
The other thing I, before I go to Andy,
the other thing I was just really interested in,
you talked about in your written submission that eSports,
the definition, um, covering eSports
and I just wondered if you could elaborate on,
on that a little bit.
Yeah, sure. So, and why that might be problematic.
Yeah, I think what we're concerned about is making sure
that the definition of eSports is pretty tight.
So at the moment there's obviously, uh,
we take wagering on eSports from a sport racing perspective,
and obviously that returns funding, um, back
to the sporting community.
So we wanna make sure that the, the definition of, um,
that is very tight so that the, our current, uh,
operating space around racing
and sport, uh, including eSports is protected from, um,
what could potentially happen from an
online casino perspective.
So we would need to kind of amend that definition. Yeah.
Yeah. We think it needs,
needs to be a little bit tough. Yeah.
Okay. So last thing quickly
before I come to Andy, was you said 15 is too many.
Do, um, some other submitters have said three
because that's the kind of existing, um, uh, physical
gambling operations in New Zealand.
Is that what you are, um, advocating for as well, or?
I don't know if it's appropriate for us
to have a view on the actual number.
Yeah. Um, but we think fifteen's too many. Sure.
And, and I think less
and local trusted operators would be,
would be a more beneficial approach.
Yeah, we think the local, having
local operators is, is the main.
Okay, fantastic. Andy Foster
finding them. Thank
You. Um, look three, three
things if I can.
Um, the first one of 'em is the one
that you haven't touched on.
I mean, you, you said right at the beginning you said that,
uh, uh, through the TAB you've contributed over $200 million
to the t to, um, racing the community.
But you haven't mentioned anything in terms
of community distributions from this particular regime
because it is separate to, um, what was covered
by the racing bill not that long ago.
So can you, can you deal with that for us please?
Because that's been one of these, the key themes that's come
through from most of the submitters.
Yeah, yeah, I mean I think we're, we're supportive
of community distribution.
Obviously our partnership with TV puts a significant amount
of money back into sport and racing in New Zealand.
Um, and yeah, we think
that the online casino bill should have, um,
have some community give back as well.
We've also, in that light, um, heard concerns from
prospective bidders for licenses that it's very,
very difficult to bid for a license if you dunno what the
distribution regime is going to be.
I mean, if we do include a community distribution regime,
in fact there's a number of other
things which are uncertain.
It makes it quite difficult for anybody to actually,
uh, put a value on it. Any thoughts? Yeah,
I think, yeah, I think we agree.
Like there, there needs to be transparency
around the tax regime
and the community contribution regime if it's separate.
Yeah. Okay. That, that, that's great.
Um, second thing is, um, just in terms of going for the, um,
for local, uh, first
and we always like New Zealand first, um,
but uh, if we do that completely,
does that lead to risks around, um, existing, um, people
who are operating in the gray
or even the black market continuing to do so, um,
and be unregulated?
So in other words, we've still got all that, those hundreds
of, um, operations which are not New Zealand based,
still continuing to operate, still continuing
to draw money out, um,
of New Zealand in an unregulated way. Yeah,
I, I think that that's where the enforcement powers need
to be strong, um, because I think that's a risk for sure.
Um, and,
and you've got, you know, heavily regulated markets
that are mature markets in the UK that are continuing
to fight that fight against black market operators.
Um, and, and just the other week, I think it was the,
the UK GC you issued 334 cease
and desist letters to black market operators in their market
and they geo block 235 sites in that market.
So, you know, that's, that's a regime
that I think you guys are, are looking to follow and model.
And, and that's why the enforcement powers need
to be strong in order to make sure that, that, that,
you know, the operators that are regulated here,
whether they be, whether they be local
or they be, um, you know, some to some degree overseas
are getting, are getting the, uh, getting access
to the market that they're paying licensees for.
So just to, 'cause I think this is important area
because we've had sort of different views being expressed.
The ability to be able of the New Zealand authorities
to be able to block, um, unwanted, uh,
ga gambling organizations from operating in New Zealand
to geoblock to issue cease and deist, um, uh, instructions.
How solid is that? Because we've heard
other organizations say it's not possible to be done.
Others have said it's,
It, it is possible to be done.
Uh, it's, it's done in Australia quite well,
but we've also got to look at, you know, working
with banking to the bank, uh, these operations
that are putting through transactions with,
from customers in New Zealand through those websites.
So there's a number of different, different ways in which
to assist the eradication of the black market.
Geo blocking is a very, very strong tool.
Okay. Cool. And look, if I can just, um,
share just one more, um, thing which is just around the,
'cause we went through the legislation, the, um,
racing bill not that long ago.
Um, and we had a discussion around eSports side of things.
Are you suggesting if we don't, um,
define it tightly enough in terms of this legislation
that we could actually be in conflict
with the previous legislation,
which we've only just passed in terms of
what represents eSports
and what you currently have monopoly with TAB to operate?
Yeah, that's what we just wanna make sure is,
is covered off correctly.
Um, so that, yeah, the online casino is kept
to online casino and that's sport
and racing is kept to sport and racing people.
I think it's just to make sure there's no gray area. Yeah,
Yeah. No
sound. Thank you. Thank
You. Thank you
very much for that. You can,
we've just gone slightly over time
so you can see there's a lot of
interest in your, um, submission.
So thank you so much for coming here in person
and, um, and submitting today.
And like I said, um, if we get in touch, hopefully, um,
if you have some other helpful information, we, we welcome.
Thank you very much. We'll be really keen to receive that.
Thank you so much. Appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you.
Alright, uh, we'll now break, uh, until four 15.
Are you back
Gi Nicola, do you mind if we come
to your submission 10 minutes early?
I'll just send you a prompt to join the panel
and then once you're on the panel, you can, um,
turn your camera and your microphone on.
Thanks. We've got our other panelists.
I just need to do a Roll call.
Okay.
Thank you members. We'll start with our, uh,
first submitter after, after this break.
Uh, Nicola Cradock from Zoo
and Aquarium Association, Australasia,
who's joining us by Zoom.
Welcome Nicola.
Thank you. Thank you.
Um, thank you for having me come along.
No worries. And thank you for starting your, um,
submission a bit early.
We do have 10 minutes, uh, set aside for your submission.
We've received a, a written a copy
of your written submission, so over to you.
Thank you. Um, just a second
because line
up everything.
Um, I'm assuming you can hear me okay.
Um, yeah, that's all coming across
very well. Thank you. Yeah,
Perfect. Thank you.
Okay, thank you. Um, hello.
And, um, thank you for having me, um, more formally.
My name is Nicola Cradock.
I'm the executive director for the Zoo
and Aquarium Association in Australasia, also known as za.
Um, Zah represents the collective voice of 98 zoos,
aquariums and wildlife parks across Australia, uh,
UA New Zealand, and Papua New Guinea that operate
to the highest standards in New Zealand.
Czar represents around 20 wildlife parks who connect
with approximately three
and a half million visitors every year.
A number of these organizations are charitable trusts
or organizations with register registered charity arms.
These organizations have,
for many years been grateful recipients of funding
provided through the regulated class Four gaming
projects supported by these funds have contributed
to social programs, conservation programs,
and community education.
These might take the form
of capital works development projects
for community experiences, animal enclosures,
conservation research or native animal rescue
and rehabilitation facilities.
Projects funded by SEA four gaming represent lasting benefit
for communities and in the case of zoos, aquariums
and wildlife parks provide long-term amenity
to promote engagement with nature.
Outdoor spaces support animal welfare
and general community wellbeing and education.
New Zealand charities have a high reliance on this community
funding with its fast paced facilitation.
CL gaming community contributions are highly
responsive to community needs.
It's a unique and very valuable community support.
The proposed online gaming bill will likely impact
around a thousand community organizations.
The online gaming bill is taking away from communities
online gambling competes
with class four gaming without the impetus
for a community contribution, reducing the available funding
for investing back into the community.
The online casino bill does not allow
for funding contributions
for reinvestment into the community.
The online casino bill serves to reduce social
and community facility staff formally opposes the
introduction of online casinos into New Zealand
and urges the government to either con reconsider this bill,
or at the very least, to amend the bill
to include requirements for online casinos to reinvest in,
in New Zealand communities.
And, um, that's my, um, sort of reading of the submission
or, or highlights of the submission
that you've all got with you.
Um, and I available to take questions, um,
from any of the the room.
Thank you. Thank you Nicola.
Um, that was really interesting to read about your work
that your organization does.
I'm just interested in terms of the funding streams.
Uh, you said that some
of your members are charitable trusts,
but do you, what other ways of funding do, uh, members
of your organization, uh, rely on,
Um, zoos and aquariums
and wildlife parks in New Zealand would receive revenue
through their gate takings for the most part,
however, um, in order to be able to, I guess,
be cost effective and competitive within the community, um,
the, uh, commercial model is established to,
it is fairly slim on margin, um, maintaining animals.
And you would recall through COVID the, um, the,
the great concern in being able to maintain animal welfare
and, um, animal health without having gate takings was
a, was a big focus.
Um, there's very slim margins in that operating budget,
and so hence there's a great reliance on additional funding,
um, for capital works development
and for other projects that can, um, support the community.
Thank you. Got a question from Andy Foster?
Hi, Andy. Yeah, thank you. Um, thank you Nicola.
Um, I'm well aware of most of the, many
of these organizations, but the committee might not be aware
of them, particularly a across New Zealand.
Um, so we're talking about zoos like Auckland, Wellington,
Orana Park, uh, all the fence, wildlife sanctuaries.
Um, what's, what other sorts
of organizations are we talking about
and what kind of impact do you think losing access to, um,
effectively having access slowly eroded away
and not having a replacement would have on those,
the capital programs in particular of those,
uh, of those organizations?
Maybe the education programs as well.
Um, so the organizations that are members
of Czar are the organizations that you mentioned.
Um, Wellington, Orana Park, Auckland, for instance.
But there's 20 organizations in
New Zealand that are our members.
There's obviously many others as well as you mentioned,
sanctuaries, et cetera, that are not, um, all
of these organizations are big, uh, community destinations
and as I mentioned, they would have connection with
around three and a half million visitors a year, both being,
um, local to their community, but also domestic travelers
and also international guests as well.
So this funding that has been
provided for many years, um, has been very relevant in terms
of capital works for, um, animal enclosures, um, for, um,
education facilities for, um, rescue
and rehabilitation facilities, for research, et cetera.
It is, um, a funding source that has been available.
It's been highly reli relied upon.
I think, um, you know, one of the great pieces within its,
um, benefit is that it has lasting,
it's a lasting asset for the community.
It's not an expenditure that is, um,
taking place within a year, and it has got no longevity.
So I think you could quite easily say that this, um,
funding stream is an investment in
the community for the future.
Thank you. Thank you, Sandy.
Thank you so much for, uh, Nicola.
We've almost run out of time there,
but thank you for, um, your written submission
and for joining us today and answering our questions.
Um, it was really interesting to hear about the, the work
that you do and for your advocacy around the community, uh,
funding aspect of this bill as well. So thank you so much.
Well, thank you. Thank you for the opportunity.
No worries. Take care. Thank you. Thanks.
Bye-bye. Alright, we'd now like
to invite an nexter who's gonna be submitting in person.
So we've got Michelle here from, uh, the man Marlins Masters
Swim Club Incorporated.
Fantastic. A t-shirt. Do I sit here?
Yes, please take a seat.
Um, we've, um, apologies, slightly unusual, uh,
room that we've got set up today.
We do have members online joining by Zoom. Mm-hmm.
And obviously, um, those of us in the room as well.
So, um, if you just, can you hear me? Yeah.
If you just look into that camera directly. Okay.
Um, in front of you. Mm-hmm.
You should be able to see everyone. Okay.
Um, and, um, we'll be able to see you as well.
Oh, hi everyone. So thank you so much for, um,
having your submission a little bit earlier as well,
and for being here in person, we do have
10 minutes for your submission.
We do have a copy of your written submission. Yes.
And, um, just
so this is an additional it it is an additional, yes.
Okay. So we'll, we might just see if we can, um, it's an,
I've got a copy here, but we might see if we can, um,
email this to the rest of the members of the committee,
but we might have to do that after your, uh, submission.
Yes, that's fine.
Um, but I've got a copy for now, but over to you. Okay.
Well thank you. Thank you very much for, um, having me, uh,
here today and on behalf of the man Marlins, uh, I did, uh,
it was a bit of an interactive, um,
presentation here we've already submitted,
but I just wanted to give very four short key points.
And what I've done is I've, um, made a, um, collection
of photos, if you can see that.
I'm not, you probably can't. But anyway, um,
it just gives you, uh, the feeling of, um, how an inclusive
and accessible we are.
And we just celebrated the, uh, 25 years last year
of being a club, which couldn't have been possible without
the help that we've had from, from funding.
Congratulations. So Thank you.
So I'm Michelle Shawki
and I'm the secretary from Ana Marlins.
And from just a bit of background about myself from 2009
to 2012, I had the, uh, great privilege
of being a community grants trustee
for the company Coast District Council,
and also a trustee for lotteries
for Wellington Myre for three years.
So I've been very lucky to be on both sides
and as grassroots
and also at the other end giving out money.
And I just know how vital it is for groups in this,
this wonderful country
and how much the, uh,
giving money does actually help these communities.
Um, so Man Marlon's Masters
Swimming Club is based in, is inclusive
and open to all ages and abilities.
We have a long history and
'cause last April we celebrated 25 years,
and those photos show quite a bit of, um, that fun
that we, we had.
We are not just about competitive swimming.
In fact, our primary focus is on fitness, health, wellbeing,
community, and learning safe ocean swimming skills,
which is more vital than ever these days.
Whilst the club and I personally do not support gambling,
I am here today because the proposed online gaming changes
risk cutting off vital community funding.
And the importance of lotteries funding
to us is a small club potty has a significant
socioeconomic divide.
Without funding support, many members would not afford
to join us or other sporting or social activities.
Lotteries funding helps us keep membership costs
low for our community.
Uh, the third point is, um, the consequence
of the online gambling profits going to central government.
It is likely that online casinos will grow at the expense
of the already regulated lotteries
and poking machine funding.
But online casinos will not have the same obligations
to give back to the community.
Therefore, the pot of funding from lotteries
for community groups will shrink shrink year by year.
If online gambling profits are not reinvested, hundreds
of small volunteer groups like ours will disappear.
As user pays will mean very few groups will be funded enough
to exist this weekend's community wellbeing, health
outcomes, and social incu inclusion.
And we can't stress that enough
how these all clubs really help to, um, buy communities
together in health and wellbeing.
And what we ask of the select committee,
if online gambling proceeds are legalized in New Zealand,
we ask that the law must require
that profits are reinvested back into the communities.
This should mirror the lottery's model, ensuring equitable,
transparent, and reliable funding
for grassroots organizations.
If this is not possible, government must commit
to an alternative funding mechanism of equal value
for small community groups.
And in conclusion, club psych cows are, the background
and back are the backbone of healthy, safe,
connected communities throughout New Zealand.
This funded funding actually literally
changes people's lives.
I've seen it from a grassroots level
and I've seen it from being a lottery's trustee
and a community grants trustee is just life changing.
We urge you to protect community funding
by ensuring online gambling profits come back to the people.
Thank you. Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I'll just check with the
committee if they've got any questions.
I did have a, um, question just in relation to the people
that participate in your group.
Yes. Do you find, obviously you're based in the area
that's got very diverse population.
Do you find that you have, um, diverse participation,
different diverse socioeconomic participation Yes.
In your, in your swimming?
And what's kind of your secret to be able to involve members
of the community in in that?
Honestly, the secret is the RAHA arena.
It is, is the most diverse, multicultural, aquatic
and sports center that I have ever come across.
And people just love being there.
It's a very well set out, um, community center
and they see us, they see the club there.
And, um, yeah, we just very, we,
we just have things online at the arena
and we also, if we are having chats to people
or we are going and training ourselves
and people, people are asking us about it,
we just say, come and join us.
We ask 'em to come for two
or three times without paying anything.
And then if they want to be part of the group, it's,
it's more like, come be part of our whanau, come be part
of a community group.
If you've just moved into a new area,
if if you can't afford it,
you don't need to pay straight away.
We can do part funding. We, we just wanna get people moving.
It's so important to keep healthy
because it's very hard to get into a doctor.
Fantastic. Yeah.
Such a And the mental health and Well,
and you would've seen, I'm sorry,
Andy and everybody else there.
Um, you can't, um, see the photos of us.
So this is what I have a lot because it's just fantastic.
You can see we are just absolutely alive.
We, we ocean swim as well, um, mostly in Tahi Bay
and we are trying to get more of the swimmers out there for,
um, just, just to learn how to swim in the ocean.
And, uh, we're all, um, I'm a qualified swim coach as well,
but we are very keen to teach, uh, especially adults how
to swim a little bit better
because now, um, we, we don't have as many
pools now in our schools that teach kids how to swim.
So that's another really great community service.
Um, helping people feel more comfortable in the water.
So it's, yeah, the photos are really incredible.
Wendy, just for your information and Melissa watching. Well,
I'm very familiar with the pool,
but I won't have seen those photos.
So I look forward to doing that future.
Yeah, okay. It really is.
The arena really is the, is the honey, honey hive
and the sort of little bees come,
it is the most fantastic facility.
You just take our children there often.
Yes. Yeah. Thank you so much.
Well, thank you so much for coming in, in person, Michelle,
and for the incredible work that you do in the community
and we hope that you're able to continue to do that.
So thank you so much for your time today. Oh, thank you.
Can I, can I just say, I just really urge
that I know you've had a long day,
but please don't let this be a dot the I cross
the t setting.
I'm sure you've heard the same thing over
and over again today, but you are literally,
literally change changes lives
with this little pocket of money.
When I was in Australia, um, I was, uh, lucky enough
to be a pilot for a blind girl
and we went to the world champs, um,
and we got, went to Australia first to qualify
and they could not believe that we got there on the back
of getting some of this community funding.
We would never have been able to do it.
And, uh, it literally changed Jane's life.
And then she went on to do a lot
of public speaking about domestic violence.
She lost your eyesight through that.
So there's just so many ripple effects with this money,
so, yeah.
Well, thank you so much. So thanks for the opportunity.
Very well made. Thank you so much for coming in today.
We really appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thanks. All right. Members. I'll just see whether we have
The squash city has there.
Okay. Um, it's very school to call, but no answer. Um,
Inform, yeah.
Members, we just have our, um, we've, we've had one, uh,
sub submit, a unavailable
and we've got, um, another one who's due to join us,
um, at 4 35.
So, uh, I think we should just, they deserve the opportunity
to have their submission heard,
so we'll just have a very brief, um, uh, suspension
and then come back at 4 35 if, um, we, uh, managed
to get hold of that submitter.
Cool. Thank you.
Live stream. It's only, do you want the, oh, the camera?
Uh oh.
Um, Andy and Melissa, can you hear me?
Yep. Yep.
Um, we, we haven't had our, um, final submitter join,
so we'll, um.